Events
======

Schedy introduces two new events it listens for and which you can emit
from your custom Home Assistant automations or scripts in order to
control Schedy's behaviour.

* ``schedy_reevaluate``: Trigger a re-evaluation of schedules. Only
  use this event if you can't express the criteria that should trigger
  a re-evaluation via the ``watched_entities`` configuration.
  Parameters are:

  * ``room``: the name (or list of names) of the room(s) to re-evaluate
    schedules for as defined in Schedy's configuration (not the
    ``friendly_name``) (default: ``null``, which means all rooms)

  * ``mode``: There are two different re-evaluation modes you can choose
    from. (default: ``"reevaluate"``)

    * ``"reevaluate"``: Re-evaluate the schedule and, if the result has
      changed compared to the previous evaluation, apply the new value to
      all actors in the room. If a re-scheduling timer is running,
      nothing is done until that timer goes off.
      This is the mode you normally want when notifying Schedy about
      state changes of entities used in your schedule.
      You can trigger a ``schedy_reevaluate`` event in this mode as
      often as you like without worrying about loosing manual value
      changes early.
    * ``"reset"``: Re-evaluate the schedule and set the resulting value
      to all actors in the room, no matter if it has changed or not.
      This mode also discardss a re-scheduling eventually planned for
      the future and instead performs one immediately.
      Use this mode in order to discard any manual adjustment at one of
      the actors, e.g. when presence state has changed or a master switch
      was toggled and you want to ensure all actors are updated.
      This is exactly what the built-in delayed re-scheduling does after
      manual adjustments when enabled.

* ``schedy_set_value``: Sets a given value for a room.
  Parameters are:

  * ``room``: the name (or list of names) of the room(s) as defined in
    Schedy's configuration (not the ``friendly_name``)
  * ``value`` or ``v``: a plain value as it could also have been generated
    by a schedule, as a simple alternative to ``expression``
  * ``expression`` or ``x``: an expression as it could also have been
    generated by a schedule, as an alternative to ``value``
  * ``force_resend``: whether to re-send the value to the actors even
    if it hasn't changed due to Schedy's records (default: ``false``)
  * ``rescheduling_delay``: a number of minutes after which Schedy should
    automatically switch back to the schedule; ``0`` disables automatic
    re-scheduling (default: the ``rescheduling_delay`` set in Schedy's
    configuration for the particular room)

.. note::

   In order to pass an ``expression`` to the ``schedy_set_value`` event,
   you need to set ``expressions_from_events: true`` in Schedy's
   configuration. Beware the implications on security this has, as
   everybody with access to Home Assistant's event bus can then execute
   arbitrary Python code on your machine with the privileges of the user
   AppDaemon runs as. Weigh for yourself on whether you really need this
   feature.

All events have an optional ``app_name`` parameter that can be submitted
when you have multiple instances of Schedy running for different purposes
and you want to address exactly one of these instances. It's value has
to be the name of the app instance as configured in AppDaemon. If you
omit this parameter, all Schedy instances will react to the event. The
app name is the name you start the app's configuration with:

::

    schedy_heating:  # "schedy_heating" would be the value to use for app_name.
      module: hass_apps_loader
      class: SchedyApp
      # ...

This is an example Home Assistant script that turns the heating in
the room named ``living`` to ``25.0`` degrees and switches back to the
regular schedule after one hour, given that you use the ``thermostat``
actor type and yourr app instance is named ``schedy_heating``, of course.

::

    - alias: Hot for one hour
      sequence:
      - event: schedy_set_value
        event_data:
          app_name: schedy_heating
          room: living
          v: 25.0
          rescheduling_delay: 60
